Let's look at the elements of the taxation system, which are used in any taxation system,
whether it is a simple taxation system or a system for paying a single tax on the tax revenue.
The slide shows a list of elements of the taxation system, which we will look at in more detail.
The first element is the status of the enterprise and its partner.
The second element is the contract and the contractual relations.
Next, we will look at the tax benefits, the documentary form of transactions,
the price policy of your enterprise, the reality of the enterprise and the accounting policy.
The first element of the taxation system in tax planning is the status of the enterprise and its partner.
In general, the status of the enterprise and its partner does not have any special significance,
except for some cases.
If your enterprise or your partner is registered in an offshore zone or in a zone with a special economic status,
that is, with a tax benefit, then the contracts in terms of price policy are of special importance.
In this case, the withdrawal of funds abroad is usually carried out.
If the company or the partner is not a resident of the Russian Federation,
there may also be some leaks of resources, including in the form of taxes.
Therefore, if your contracts are concluded not only with residents,
that is, with Russian organizations, but also with non-residents,
that is, with foreign organizations, I recommend studying this topic in more detail either on the Internet or in special literature.
The deal and practice of considering violations or options of the general organization of transactions with public organizations of the disabled is well known.
In the 1990s, the scheme of organization of your production, activity, service provision was closely related to these organizations,
since benefits for disabled organizations were presented literally on all taxes,
both on the tax on the added value, on the tax on profit and on other taxes.
At present, the status of the enterprise as a public organization of the disabled is used quite rarely,
since after considering the practice of tax evasion on these enterprises,
the government allowed the tax authorities to make the appropriate changes that minimized the use of these organizations in the activities of many enterprises of the country.
Non-commercial companies.
You probably know that since 2006, when the President of our country openly announced the operation with non-commercial companies,
the deals with these companies, where significant amounts of funds were transferred, have now practically gone down the drain,
due to the fact that tax authorities often request a list of the status of the enterprise of partners in their requests,
where the status and registration place can be marked.
Individual entrepreneurs as the status of partners of enterprises, perhaps, have the widest application at present.
The scheme is simple here.
Enterprise employees become individual entrepreneurs.
This is due to the fact that if the person receiving income from your company is obliged to pay a tax of 13% in the form of tax on the income of individuals,
then being your employee, but acting only as an individual entrepreneur, not a person, the tax rate on his income will be 6%.
Interestingly, this is beneficial for the employer, who, due to the reduction of the employee's income rate, reduces the amount of labor payment.
The next element of the tax system is the contract.
Contracts are included in any deal.
Another thing is that some contracts can be included both in written form and in verbal form.
In written form, contracts are included in the obligatory order, those that are directly mentioned in the Civil Code,
in particular, these are contracts for construction and installation work, insurance contracts, and some others.
All other contracts you have the right to include in the verbal form.
However, in practice, it is desirable to conclude a contract in written form, where penalty sanctions for violation of economic agreements and the amount of tax you plan to pay to the budget,
as well as other important indicators of your relations with a partner, can be provided.
In practice, contracts are often used not for direct purposes, that is, not with the aim of concluding some kind of operation,
but with the aim of not only concluding some kind of deal and carrying out an operation on it, but also with the aim of reducing tax time.
It should be borne in mind that taxpayers, of course, monitor these moments, these options of relations between enterprises.
In the slide you can see a brief list of things you should pay attention to before concluding a contract, so that there are no tax risks, so that there are no tax consequences in the future.
In practice, contract replacement is very common. For example, you concluded a purchase-sale contract for goods.
If you work on a simplified tax system, then, as we have already considered, a very important point for applying this system is the object of taxation and the size of your income.
If the amount of income, I remind you, is more than 20 million rubles, then you lose the right to apply a simplified tax system and should apply the usual tax system,
and should pay all the basic taxes, such as income tax, tax on added value, and so on. For these purposes, enterprises often change contracts, especially at the end of the reporting period,
when it becomes clear that you have exceeded this limit and you will have to recalculate your income for the entire tax period, as if you had applied not a simplified tax system, but a regular one from the very beginning of the tax period.
Enterprises, instead of a purchase-sale contract, conclude intermediary contracts. This is, of course, pursued and considered carefully by tax authorities.
If you worked on a purchase-sale contract during the tax period, and at the end of the reporting period you suddenly concluded an intermediary contract, then it is quite possible that such a replacement of the contract will be recognized as fictitious and all taxes will be recalculated in accordance with the legislation, that is, in accordance with the usual taxation system.
In addition to the replacement of the contract with legal entities, there is also a frequent substitution of civil and legal contracts, labor contracts, which are concluded by the employer with the physical entities, in accordance with our legislation.
If the employer concludes a labor contract with the employer, then the employer, the enterprise, is obliged to pay a single social tax to the budget.
If the contract with the employer is concluded in the form of a civil and legal contract, then in accordance with the 24th chapter of the Tax Code, the employer pays the same single social tax, but with the exception of the deduction of the Social Insurance Fund.
The maximum rate at the moment for the Social Insurance Fund is 2.9%. If the payment amounts to contracts with employees are sufficient, then it is natural to conclude a civil and legal contract.
We will consider the rules for concluding such contracts in more detail later.
The amount of these deductions is reduced in the form of the pension fund of the Russian Federation.
The content of the contract is no less important. If the contract is a replacement of, for example, marketing, information services or legal services, then the content of the contract is usually quite vague due to the fact that there is usually no material expression of these services.
Therefore, it is necessary to very adequately approach the content of this contract, which, as a rule, should be attached reports on the provision of services in the form of a floppy disk, in writing form, in electronic form,
so that your expenses on these services are accepted as a result of considering the correctness of the deduction of certain taxes.
The documentation of some transactions, which are difficult to register, is no less important. For example, a contract for the non-refund transfer of property, work or services.
As a rule, such an operation for the non-refund transfer, recognized in accordance with the Civil Code as a gift contract, attracts the attention of taxpayers and, unfortunately, is not effectively considered by the parties of this transaction.
The fact is that with the non-refund transfer, it is important to properly designate the reference market value of the transferred property or work and services.
Because it is with the market value, in accordance with the tax law, that certain taxes are calculated, such as the income tax and the VAT. And these are some of the important taxes in our tax system.
Let's look at an example of the drafting of a contract. In this contract, the places in which errors are most often made are highlighted, and thus these places attract the attention of the tax authorities.
First, the subject of the contract must be clearly and clearly indicated. If the service or work has a quantitative characteristic, then these quantitative characteristics should be highlighted.
If the taxpayer is not only a taxpayer, but also a taxpayer on the income tax, then the amount of VAT must be highlighted. Moreover, the amount can be indicated as part of both the income and the surplus.
For example, your services cost 118 thousand rubles. If the VAT is calculated in that number, that is, in the amount of 118 thousand rubles, then the amount of VAT will be equal to 18 thousand, and the product itself will cost 100 thousand rubles.
If you write 118 thousand rubles in the contract without the VAT, then, being a taxpayer of this tax, the amount of VAT will be calculated above this amount and will be 21 thousand rubles.
In addition to the quantitative and summary characteristics, as well as the sum of VAT, which is assumed according to this contract, the description, indication of the legal and factual address should be given great importance when drafting the contract.
There are terms such as a legal address, that is, the address indicated in the charter documents of the enterprise, a postal address, on which a postal correspondence is carried out, and a factual address, which can also change often, as well as the location of a particular company.
The fact is that the address is of great importance, namely a legal, physical or postal address, when drafting the invoice.
The drafting of the invoice for VAT has great importance in accordance with the requirements of the legislator, stated in Article 169 of the Tax Code.
The requirements of the legislator for the drafting of the invoice, which is the primary tax document, on the basis of which tax deductions are applied to enterprises, are described there.
In accordance with the above article, when drafting the invoice, you must indicate the legal address. If your supplier made a mistake and indicated a factual or postal address, then the tax authorities have the right to refuse you a deduction on the tax added value, which is a rate of 10 or 18 percent.
In addition to these conditions, it is very important to indicate to the officials who are responsible for signing this contract.
In the same invoice, the signature of the head and chief accountant is provided. Only in accordance with the confidentiality of the invoice can the deputy chief accountant or deputy director, deputy head, sign.
If your contract was signed by a non-head, and the person does not have the confidentiality for this, then there may be disagreements on the order of deduction of the tax on the added value.
The next element of the tax system is tax benefits. Tax benefits are currently established according to the following taxes. Tax on the added value, social tax, income tax, property tax.
Tax on the added value, tax exemption, are subject to those enterprises that meet certain conditions for revenue for a certain tax period.
Any enterprise with small revenues can receive this exemption on the basis of the corresponding statement to the tax authorities until the 20th of the period in which you are going to apply these tax benefits.
Documentary confirmation of the lack of high incomes that do not exceed the limit set in Chapter 21 of the Tax Code for such enterprises that want to receive exemptions is a subject of close attention for taxpayers.
Benefits can also be provided to exporters. Here, the order of the documentary confirmation is also very important, related to the tax on the added value on export goods.
There are benefits for enterprises that apply special regimes. This is not how taxpayers pay the tax on property and taxpayers of the single tax on the added income.
Let's give a small example. An enterprise is going to buy a large number of expensive machines that, in accordance with the tax and collection legislation, are subject to tax on property.
In order not to pay this tax, the head company creates a new enterprise that applies the simplified tax regime, no matter what object the tax is imposed on.
The machines are purchased at this particular enterprise, at the expense of the borrowed funds or funds of the founders, and then these machines are transferred to the main enterprise for rent.
As a result, the tax on property is not paid by the subsidiary company or the main enterprise.
These agreements are currently attracting a lot of attention from taxpayers, and in this case it is better not to take risks.
I recommend you to look at the website of taxpayers on these issues, because here are currently being implemented many projects by tax authorities to reduce the number of enterprises that apply these agreements in order to avoid taxes.
In addition, enterprises that refuse to pay the benefits attract a lot of attention from tax authorities.
For example, the turnover of enterprises is small, and they may not be NTS payers, but still do not apply this right.
In this case, the enterprise is considered to be a benefit and compared with the average performance.
At the same time, the tax inspection is carried out in a more thorough way than the payroll inspection.
One of the main topics of discussion between taxpayers and tax authorities during the period of tax inspections is the correctness of the documentary confirmation of income and expenses.
This will be the subject of consideration of the current section, that is, the documentary form of transactions.
In accordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation, all operations carried out at the enterprise must be confirmed by primary documents.
Currently, the primary documents, under which written evidence of the financial operation is understood, are developed by the legislature,
and are a unified form of primary accounting documents, which is mandatory for almost all enterprises operating in the Russian Federation.
Unified forms currently apply to the registration of transactions on basic funds, that is, on expensive property, buildings, structures, transport.
Unified forms apply to the purchase of materials, to the unloading of goods, to the payment of taxes, to the payment of taxes on goods, transport, and deposit.
There is a unified form in the form of an invoice, which is probably familiar to many of you.
In addition, enterprises can use non-unified forms, if there are no such forms in the unified forms albums.
In this case, the legislature gives full permission to develop such a document at any enterprise, but some rules must be observed.
More precisely, all the requisites in this document should be mentioned, namely, the nomination of the document, the date of its composition, the nomination of the organization that composed this document, the description of the operation itself,
what services are involved, the implementation of goods or works, the quantitative characteristics, if any. For example, the rent of a room can be expressed in the amount variant,
for example, $ 1,000 per month can be expressed in the quantitative characteristics, for example, $ 1,000 per 1 square meter.
In both cases, the contract and the act of acceptance of the transfer and the act of fulfilling the rent obligations can be expressed in different forms.
The amounting characteristics of the operation are present in all cases, and it must be clearly expressed. Let me remind you that in the Russian Federation, where the main monetary unit is the ruble, the operations must be expressed in rubles.
If your contract is concluded in the conditional monetary units or in foreign currency, then it must be presented in this document in the primary, the order of the transfer in rubles, or the amount in the ruble expression is literally written.
Also, in the form developed by your enterprise, the positions of the persons responsible for the implementation of the financial operations described in the document and their personal signatures with decryption must be indicated.
To familiarize yourself with the order of the transfer document at a particular enterprise, there is a rule established in one of the positions on accounting, obligatory for all enterprises operating in Russia.
When making an accounting policy, a turnover document schedule must be applied as an application, where the order of the presentation of certain documents, the terms of their presentation and, of course, the forms of ununified primary documents that were developed at this enterprise to reflect their operations will be indicated.
Let's look at one of the types of documents that are often used in practice at almost all enterprises. This is a form of an act on the provision of services or on the performance of work.
There will be no special, careful attitude from your side if, for example, you are a customer of these works.
I suggest you become a company manager when reviewing this act, when reviewing this example, to understand what actions you should take if the performer of your enterprise brought you a document in the form of an act on the provision of services with a request to sign it and, accordingly, to receive a payment.
A small hint. In this act, several serious mistakes have been made, based on which the tax inspector would have the right to refuse you both the total tax added value and the total expenses under this contract.
Thus, at the beginning, in the first paragraph of this contract, that is, this act, the position of the person supposed to sign this act was not indicated.
Further, the amount of the sum of the characteristics for consulting services and the sum of the tax added value were not provided.
Below, as you can see, the positional indicators of the persons who signed this contract were not indicated. Thus, at the manager's place, you should not have signed this act, but should have drawn up a protocol with claims,
carefully indicating all the mistakes, and this protocol would be the basis for refusing to sign this act and paying the compensation accordingly.
In the workbook, you can consider this example in more detail and practice filling out the protocol on the claimant's claim.
The next element of the taxation system is the price policy. In general, there are several criteria for determining the price for taxation on different types of taxes.
As mentioned earlier, special groups of taxpayers are allocated among taxpayers in Russia and abroad, who are recognized as interdependent persons.
These enterprises, whose share of the participation is more than 20%, are treated with special care.
The price policy is related to the re-examination of transactions with the participation of taxpayers, and the price policy is related to the re-examination of transactions with the participation of taxpayers.
At the moment, the Article 20 and 40 of the First Tax Code specify that changes will be made in the near future, and special chapters will be adopted, which will consider the concept of interdependent persons in more detail.
At the moment, the normal prices that are accepted without questions by taxpayers are those prices that are not subject to the law.
At the moment, the normal prices that are accepted without questions by taxpayers are those prices that are subject to the law.
If the prices do not correspond to the market prices, then more detailed checks are carried out.
For example, if an enterprise that is part of a holding company receives a product produced by a holding company at prices lower than market prices,
as you know, such prices are called transfer prices and attract the attention of taxpayers, and, accordingly, the price re-examination is possible.
If you have obviously high prices, then the sanctions will certainly follow from the tax authorities, since such prices are usually applied when tax deductions are minimized, both in the form of tax deductions on the NTSB and on the expense of the tax on the profit.
Usually, there are such transactions when the supplier changes sharply, and the price of the goods, services and services is much higher than the previous suppliers.
Obviously, the prices are lower, and they can also attract attention during inspections, since they are usually associated with the holding of advertising promotions.
The next option in the price policy of an enterprise can be favorable prices.
These prices can be provided for individual partners, and no questions from the tax authorities are raised, only those favorable prices that are provided, for example, for budget organizations or for the organization of the disabled, for socially unprotected layers of the population.
If the prices for the realizable property are lower than the balance, then, in principle, only the status of the partner is important here, according to which you realize a particular property or service.
The next element of the tax system that we must consider is the reality of the activities carried out.
Special attention was paid to this concept in 2006 when the Supreme Court issued a decision on No. 53 of October 12, 2006.
The fact is that when determining the reasonableness of the tax benefit received by an enterprise, the concept of the reality of activity is of great importance.
Therefore, there is no doubt about the costs of their purchase.
For example, an enterprise that implements goods via the Internet does not necessarily have to and can carry out very expensive office repairs,
since there is no point in the price of expensive office supplies, for example, aquariums.
On the other hand, there may be a lack of real opportunity to carry out any production activity, and then a deal with such a partner can also be questioned.
For example, your enterprise has a deal with a small enterprise on the production of any products.
If the enterprise finds that there are no appropriate production areas, for example, only an office is rented, and according to the documents, this enterprise produces any goods,
then this deal will be questioned, and your expenses associated with the purchase of goods at this enterprise will also not be taken into account when calculating taxes.
In other words, if you purchase bulbs at a disabled enterprise, then this is real activity. If you purchase forest for the disabled in a public organization, then this is completely unrealistic activity, and since the doubts are obvious, this deal can be considered fictitious.
Of course, distortion of real data in documents can lead to tax sanctions.
For example, if during a tax inspection it is visible that your employees have high enough income, and you reflect low income in the primary documents,
then, accordingly, there will be a question of the possibility of lowering the income, and a more thorough inspection will take place, including a meeting with your counterparts and partners.
The next and last element of the tax system is accounting policy.
As we have already said, the main elements, the main points when considering accounting policy, when approving this order, which should be adopted before the start of the tax period,
for example, in 2008 we had to develop accounting policy and approve it by the order of the head in December 2007.
At the same time, it should be borne in mind that accounting policy is developed for the purposes of accounting accounting, and if you are on the general tax system, accounting policy is also developed for the purposes of tax accounting.
For the purpose of calculating tax revenue, accounting data on the primary documents reflected in the accounting record should be somewhat corrected for the composition of the tax declaration on tax revenue and calculation of the tax base on this tax.
First of all, the method of recognizing income and expenses is very important. In accounting policy, we must determine the method, the choice of this method.
If your income does not exceed 1 million rubles on average for the last four quarters, then, of course, the method, the method choice is very important.
If your average income for the last four quarters still exceeds the million ruble limit, then it is not necessary to approve this method, since the method of calculation, of unloading is used by default, since there is no possibility to apply the cash method.
The calculation of reserves is a very important element in reducing tax payments during the tax period. A small example of what reserves are needed and when they are calculated.
First of all, reserves should be noted, they are calculated only when our income is recognized as the unloading of goods, work and services, and not as the income of money.
To optimize the tax base a little, since the non-payments in the country are still quite common, or you sign contracts with a payment deadline,
then, if there is no income from the cash on the account or in the cash register of the enterprise, it is not possible to pay taxes from the cash. Therefore, the tax code provides for the calculation of virtual expenses, for example, in the form of reserves.
If, for example, you plan to repair a building, a building or a transport at the end of the year, then the legislator allows the amount of expenses planned for the repair to be taken into account in the tax base at the beginning of the tax period.
For example, the repair is planned for 5 million in September-October 2008, having distributed this amount evenly for four quarters, that is, for the accounting period on the income tax.
The first amount in the form of a reserve for the implementation of repairs you have the right to take into account in the first quarter, in the first report for this year.
It should be noted that the reserves are provided for the payment of upcoming vacations, for the reserve for the payment of the 13th salary, for the payment of the reward for the work as a result of the year.
There is a reserve for warranty repairs. These are all the reserves that are currently provided in Chapter 25 of the Tax Code.
Thus, with the help of reserves, the position of income and expenses calculated in a virtual way is equaled.
The last place and mandatory position is present in the selection of methods for writing down the materials of the main means of goods.
Thus, the materials can be written down in accordance with the policy adopted by the accounting and in accordance with the legislation, one of four methods.
By the method of the average cost, by the unit of reserves, by the method of FIFA or LIFA, you can specify the benefits and needs of applying a particular method to a group of materials or basic goods.
It is important to clarify the requirements of accountants who must know how to calculate in accordance with the legislation.
A good tool for tax planning on tax revenue is the formation of direct and indirect expenses.
The fact is that in accordance with the tax law, the composition of direct expenses, which directly relate to the production of a particular type of product or work or service,
can be completely different depending on the type of activity, type of product, and can also differ from the method of composition of direct expenses for accounting purposes.
Depending on the composition, the list of direct and indirect expenses that we provide to the accounting policy for the purpose of taxation, this will be our tax base in the current tax period.
Of all the types of reserves that an enterprise can accumulate when applying the accumulation method, perhaps the main place is the reserve on dubious debts.
For dubious debts, for the purpose of tax accounting on tax revenue, a debt that has not been paid for the period established by the contract between the supplier and the buyer is taken.
The reserve can be accumulated for both accounting purposes and tax purposes, but it is of particular importance when applying the accumulation method, when you must already reflect the revenue from the implementation of the goods you have unloaded, work and services, money is not received, you must pay the tax on the profit, and there are no return funds.
To do this, the legislator provided the possibility of accumulating a reserve on dubious debts, which can be used by all enterprises that are in the regular tax system and apply the accumulation method.
Thus, a reserve on dubious debts of 100% from the debtor's debt, which is questionable to taxpayers, can be accumulated by an enterprise within 90 days of the term of payment under the contract.
In addition, accounting policy requires a reflection of the order of payment of advance payments chosen by you. According to the 25th chapter of the Tax Code, advance payments on tax on the profit, which we are obliged to pay as a result of the first quarter, half-year, nine months and years, may be as follows.
The first option is the quarterly payment of advance payments, the second is the monthly payment of advance payments, and the third option is the monthly advance payments, but calculated according to the actual data for the reporting period.
All these methods and options for calculating the tax base on the tax on the profit we must reflect in accounting policy. All enterprises have such items of primary necessity as property in the form of buildings, structures, at least furniture and computing equipment.
Therefore, the company managers, not to mention accountants, of course, need to know the options for forming the value of the property. The Tax Code provides that all actual costs associated with the acquisition of this property are included in the initial value of the property.
There is a certain limit on the value of the property purchased, the cost of the main funds that will be credited to the expense part of the tax base on the profit during the term of operation of this property.
This limit is 20,000 rubles, that is, starting from 2,001 rubles, the property will be recognized in the tax record as amortized.
If the property costs less than this limit, then we have the right to write down the cost of the purchased objects immediately, that is, at the time of purchase.
For example, we decided to purchase a Kserox, its price in the store is 19,700 rubles. To bring this Kserox to our office, we can choose one of the options, either to use the services of our own transport, and then, according to the calculations of economists and accountants, these expenses will be 500 rubles,
or to use the services of the store. The difference here is associated with the formation of the initial value, that in the first option, when we bring Kserox with our own forces, then the cost of expenses in the amount of 500 rubles should be taken into account in the value of Kserox.
And our Kserox will cost 19,700 plus 500 rubles, that is, 20,200 rubles.
And if we bring this Kserox with the forces of the store, the cost of transport services will be included in the cost of Kserox according to the terms of the contract, then our Kserox, as it was, will remain 19,700, taking into account this cost.
In the first case, Kserox will be written off as a main means for two years from the day of purchase and the introduction into operation, and in the second case, 19,700 will reduce our tax base. Thus, we can regulate, in certain cases, the initial value of the property and thus regulate the tax base on the tax on the profit.
In the formation of the value of the property, for the purposes of tax accounting, other methods and methods of the option of forming the value that are provided by the tax legislation can be used.
For example, enterprises can use the so-called depreciation premium, which now accounts for 10% of the value of the property. The essence of it is that when buying the main means, we have the right to immediately write off within 10% of the value of the property to the expense base.
This is a voluntary right, not a duty. Having recorded this approach in accounting policy, enterprises have the right to reduce the tax base to the amount of the depreciation premium.
We also have the right to include the initial value of the property. In addition, the interest on the loan, which is often used in the activities of the enterprise, can be included in the initial value of the property and can be taken into account in the tax and collection.
The expenses for the repair of the property, be it a building, a vehicle, or a computer equipment, always have a place to be in practice.
It should also be borne in mind that the expenses for the repair can be included in the value of the property, and can be written off immediately. What is this related to?
If the expenses for the repair were made before the object was taken into account, they should be included in the initial value of the property. If the repair was made while the object was in operation, then the expenses for the repair are written off immediately.
Let's look at a small example of the formation of the value of the property on a building that was purchased by an organization in the summer months, for example, in July.
At the same time, the building has certain shortcomings requiring repair work. The cost of the building when purchased was 15 million rubles, the cost of planned repair work on the building was 2.5 million rubles, the operating period of the building is 10 years.
The first option is that the enterprise decides to enter the building in the summer, since most of the employees are on vacation, heating is not required, and you can start minimal activity in the summer, and, if possible, carry out planned repairs.
In this case, the cost of the building will be 15 million rubles, and the cost of repairs will be 2.5 million rubles.
The second option is that the enterprise decides to enter the building in the summer, since most of the employees are on vacation, heating is not required, and you can start minimal activity in the summer, heating is not required.
Thus, the initial cost of the property can be planned, depending on whether the enterprise has a significant revenue at the moment, whether it is worth reducing this revenue to the amount of repair work produced at the moment,
or transferring it to the next tax periods, and deciding on the management of the enterprise jointly with the accounting and financial services of the enterprise.
Let's look at the advantages and disadvantages of the tax economy or tax payments optimization methods that we have considered earlier when considering the tax planning methods of different tax systems and tax collections.
When planning for a tax system, we have already said that it is important to choose a tax object, choose contracts with suppliers and contractors, and some other points.
The most common option for tax optimization at enterprises using a simplified tax system is to choose a contract or replace the contract with a sale on an intermediary basis, especially at the end of the accounting period.
Of course, you can use this method and it will not have any complaints from the tax authorities.
The only thing is that when the following conditions are met, if the amount or percentage of the intermediary reward is clearly stated in the intermediary contract, the amount of the reward is clearly listed to the client or partner in accordance with the conditions of the contract.
Documentation is made in accordance with the conditions of the contract and in accordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation on the rules of the registration of primary accounting documents.
By the way, the contract and the intermediary act are not approved in the unified forms applied in our country for all enterprises. Therefore, when using the intermediary contract, you should pay close attention to the formulation of the intermediary act.
Some enterprises, when planning the optimization of payments, often replace the reward with a loan contract at the end of the accounting period.
This option of optimizing tax payments will not have any complaints from the tax authorities, perhaps only if the loan was received not from the supplier with whom you worked during the accounting period, but from a completely different legal entity, another supplier with whom you are supposed to start working.
Another method of planning the optimization of the unified tax of an enterprise when using a simplified tax system is the weekly payment method.
The fact is that when receiving a payment, for example, in excels, the income is not subject to the inclusion of the revenue in the tax object.
However, this scheme is known to tax authorities and is carefully checked for acceptability and adequacy of the terms of the transaction for this enterprise.
The tax planning of the unified tax system for the taxable income provides for two main directions that are related to the desire of the enterprise to apply this system.
The first option is profitable when you have a large revenue, for example, the city center, and your income is high.
If your enterprise is located on the outskirts of the city, then the amount of the unified tax may not suit you due to the minimum income.
In the first case, physical indicators related to the calculation of the unified tax on the taxable income are regulated.
Let's look at a few examples.
For example, a retail enterprise that calculates a unified tax based on the area of no more than 150 square meters.
If the enterprise is not interested in paying this tax, it can simply review, for example, rent or buy a larger area.
This area will exceed the limit for the application of the unified tax on the taxable income in the amount of 150 square meters.
As a result, this enterprise, this type of activity carried out by this enterprise will not fall under this system.
If the enterprise provides transportation services, then a physical indicator is applied to the application of the unified tax system.
The physical indicator is applied when transporting a number of cars that are yours or are rented for transportation.
The physical indicator is applied when transporting passengers.
It is logical to draw a conclusion about the increase in the number of cars that will carry out this transportation, or the increase in the number of places, for example, in the gazelles for transporting passengers.
If, on the contrary, you are not interested in applying the EINVD system, then you can do the following.
For example, an enterprise that provides car service services in this region can use the unified tax system on the taxable income for retail services.
As you know, car service services consist of repairing a car using spare parts.
Thus, by dividing the contract for the provision of car service services into two contracts, as services as such and the implementation of spare parts, you will divide the type of activity, your income into two types.
One type of activity will be taxed in the general tax system or simplified tax system, as you choose.
The other type of activity will be taxed with the unified tax on the taxable income.
The last factor in the tax planning of the EINVD system is the payment date of the settlement in the Pension Fund of the Russian Federation.
I remind you that the unified tax on the taxable income can be reduced to these payments, but only after their actual payment.
The tax planning of the EINVD system, as I said earlier, is associated with some options and methods that are proposed by the Legislative Assembly for the election in Chapter 25 of the Tax Code.
Perhaps the most important element of the tax planning of the EINVD is the composition of direct expenses that you must choose and approve in the business accounting policy.
In accordance with Article 318 of the Tax Code, the minimum amount of direct expenses for the tax on the income of the enterprise consists of three main elements.
These are the expenses for the payment of labor of the workers engaged in production activities, taking into account the payment of the settlement of the unified social tax and pension contributions.
These are the main materials that participate in the production process and amortization of the main funds directly involved in the production process.
For example, we can consider a confectionery factory.
The materials that must be taken into account in the direct expenses can be sugar, nuts, raisins, dried fruits and, of course, the fans in which these sweets are wrapped.
The boxes where the sweets are loaded for the purchase of the customer can be taken into account as indirect expenses.
I remind you that the difference between direct and indirect expenses in calculating the tax on the income is that direct expenses cannot be taken into account as part of the tax base until the product is implemented, and indirect expenses can be taken into account in the tax base as they are implemented.
Thus, the sweets used as gifts for packaging can be written off to the expense base immediately.
The payment of labor, which may and should be taken into account as part of the direct expenses of the confectionery factory, should include at least the payment of labor of the workers engaged in the production of sweets.
The confectionery workshops may include the brigadiers, the head of the workshops, the security service, the cleaning service of these workshops.
They are directly not involved in the production of sweets, so they can be included as part of the indirect expenses.
Then the payment of labor of these workers in the confectionery factory will be written off to the expense base without waiting for the implementation of the sweets produced by the confectionery workshops.
The main means that should be taken into account as part of the direct expenses should include at least the machines, the machining lines with which these sweets are produced.
The building in which these machines are located can be taken into account as part of the direct expenses and as part of the indirect expenses.
It all depends on your accounting policy and your planning.
When calculating the tax on profits, a lot of time is spent on optimization of calculations in connection with the choice of the legislation on some types of expenses, for example, on penalty sanctions.
We will look at the example of the calculation of penalty sanctions related to the implementation of the conditions of the economic agreements.
Documentary confirmation of expenses is also important when planning the tax on profits, because expenses for tax deductions are accepted only if they are economically justified and documented.
As we have already considered, unified forms of primary accounting documents and their own developed ones are used for these purposes.
Let's move on to the example of planning of penalty sanctions in order to calculate the tax on profits.
Let's assume that the monthly income of our company is 2 million rubles. The company provides consulting services.
The expenses of this company are mainly related to the salary of the employees of the company and amount to 300 thousand rubles.
The loan amount that the company decided to take in this accounting period is 5 million rubles. The return period is 30 days.
The contract stipulates that the interest rate in the event of a term of the loan return is 5% per annum, which is 20,548 rubles per month.
The penalty sanctions for the term of the loan are 3% per annum. At first glance, the contract states that we have the right to take loans in any amount that the founder or the head of the company wishes.
In our example, the return period of the loan was extended by 10 days, and the penalty, in accordance with the terms of the contract, will be 1.5 million rubles.
So, when calculating the tax base on the tax on profits, taking into account the interest rate on the loan and the penalty sanctions, the amount will be only 179,452 rubles, due to the fact that the penalty sanctions, which we may not pay yet, and most likely will not pay the borrower, will be minimal.
In the second case, if we do not take a loan contract and do not consider the penalty sanctions as the expenses of the current period, the tax base will be 1,679,452 rubles.
Why is this example given? Despite the possibility and reality of signing such a contract, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that when considering the numbers and the reasonability of signing such a contract, the essence of the deal is far from reality.
Because with a monthly revenue of 2 million, it is difficult to return 5 million rubles within a month, which is provided by this loan contract. Therefore, when checking the tax base, such a contract can be taken into doubt and recognized as fictitious.
Accordingly, the penalty sanctions, for the amount of which the income of the borrower was reduced, the tax on profits was reduced, can be withdrawn from the tax base and the penalty sanctions are applied.
The conclusion of the civil legal agreements, as we have already said, provides for a reduction in the rate of a single social tax in part of the social insurance fund, which currently accounts for 2.9%.
It should be borne in mind that the civil legal agreement must contain a certain set of characteristics that are different from the labor contract.
In particular, the civil legal agreement must provide for the amount of work that must be performed for a certain period of time, the order of receiving these works, that is, the determination of the quality of these works, and some other conditions.
For example, some enterprises, in order to reduce the amount of a single social tax, pay their employees as a payment of the account fees or the payment of loans.
I do not recommend using these schemes, because, in accordance with the other part of the tax code on the calculation of the tax on the income of individuals, the amounts that are given to the workers in the form of accounting fees or loans and which were not returned to them are considered when calculating the tax on the income of individuals as the income received by these individuals.
If the employer is trying to save on a single social tax, then the physical person who is offered to pay such income is threatened at the end of the year with an additional tax amount in the form of income tax for physical persons.
The outstaffing scheme is very widespread.
This is when the employment relations with the workers are replaced in accordance with the labor code for the relations with other enterprises where workers are transferred under labor agreements.
In other words, the workers who are transferred to subsidiary companies that are on the simplified taxation system are not payers of a single social tax.
If this company is in a mutually dependent relationship with the main enterprise, then the employer saves a significant part of the sum of the single social tax.
Another option for saving a single social tax is to divide the labor payment into various payments that are provided by the labor code.
For example, your labor payment can consist of a deposit, a tariff rate, as well as compensation for certain conditions, such as compensation for vacation, compensation for reorganization of the enterprise.
Another form of labor payment is material assistance. In accordance with the tax code, a single social tax is not paid or calculated.
It should be borne in mind that compensation is considered with special care and is studied by taxpayers from the following points.
Compensation for unused vacation is often paid by the enterprise in the following way. It is not a temporary labor agreement, but an urgent labor agreement.
After a short period of no more than three months, the employee is fired and he is paid compensation for unused vacation, for which a single social tax is not charged.
Such agreements are adopted by taxpayers as fictitious and are considered throughout the payment period. The calculation base for these compensations is calculated and a single social tax, fine and penalty are added.
Tax planning of the tax on the added value is associated with the main two indicators, from which the amount of taxes in the budget is calculated.
The first indicator is the amount of taxes on the added value, which is subject to payment in the budget received in the reporting period of income. The second indicator is the amount of VAT, which is subject to repayment from the budget based on the expenses received in the reporting period.
How can we reduce the performance of goods, services and services in the current reporting period? One of the options widely used in practice is to divide the contract into components.
We have already considered this option in other taxes, but there are nuances in the tax on the added value. Therefore, I think it is necessary to consider this option as an example.
For example, you purchase a product for 100,000 rubles, two sets of equipment and are going to implement it.
The price of the implementation can be both the price of the release and the price of the release, which provides for penalty sanctions for non-compliance with any obligations, for example, for a product that was not accepted in time in accordance with the terms of the contract.
The first option is calculated by the amount of taxes on the added value, which is shown on the screen. In this case, the income will be 200,000 rubles, and the amount of VAT will be 30,508 rubles.
This amount should be reflected in the tax declaration for the reporting period.
The next option is to apply a penalty sanction to the supplier. In this case, the price of the contract is 80,000 rubles, and the penalty sanction is 20,000 rubles.
If we know in advance that the supplier, due to some circumstances, for example, will delay the reception of equipment, we can choose the second option.
If these options are not applied systematically, then most likely the tax authorities will take such a calculation of the tax base on the taxes added to the contract.
I must say that the tax authorities are against such an approach, but arbitration courts that were considered under such contracts were always carried out in favor of the taxpayer.
There are also several options for optimizing the tax on the added value that is collected from the budget.
If the invoice that you received from the supplier does not meet the requirements, the tax authorities will require a correction in the invoice, and the invoice will be replaced.
There are several ways to do this. For example, you can show the invoice incorrectly and send it back to the supplier. The invoice will be returned to you after a certain time, and you will be able to use it.
You can also investigate your supplier on the subject of the reality of his activities. This was indicated in the decision of the Supreme Arbitration Court No. 53, October 12, 2006, which was already mentioned earlier.
You thus show due consideration, and due to the fact that the supplier may cause you doubts for any reason, you can devote a certain time to finding out his location, reality of his activities,
and the validity of checking his identification numbers. In this case, the invoice will also be accepted with a certain delay as per the registration in the magazine of the correspondent at your enterprise.
Why and when is the use of tax deductions delayed? The fact is that if your tax deductions in the reporting period exceed the amount to be paid to the budget from the received income, the enterprise, without exception, undergoes a payroll check.
You are invited to the tax inspection with documents confirming tax deductions. Such a policy has been carried out by the tax inspection not so long ago, since 2007.
This meeting with tax officials takes a lot of time and effort. Therefore, if you do not want to or do not have time for this, you can refuse to submit a tax declaration in the amount not exceeding the amount paid to you.
What are the consequences of tax deductions?
What is the responsibility of the tax office in accordance with this violation of the legislation of the Russian Federation or other countries?
In Russia, any person who was identified as a perpetrator of a violation of the law is recognized as guilty.
All enterprises, individual entrepreneurs, as well as individuals who have hidden their income for any reason or have miscalculated their income, will be obliged to pay fines and fines for incorrectly calculated income if the period of search is not more than three years.
The exception to this general rule is the sanctions under articles 120 and 122 of the First Tax Code. In the event of a gross violation of the rules of accounting for income and expenses and a non-payment or incomplete payment of the tax amount, there is no period of search for tax deductions.
The main types of violations of the tax law of the Russian Federation at the moment are considered violations of the rules of accounting for the tax body, for example, you started trading on the market, but did not take into account the location of this activity.
You did not present a tax declaration in time. In this case, in accordance with article 119 of the Tax Code, you must pay at least 100 rubles for each tax declaration or a minimum amount of 20% of the tax income.
If you avoid paying taxes in particularly large amounts, then there is already a corresponding responsibility under the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation.
In general, the development of the tax system, the tightening of the tax checks regime or weakening in this area is associated with the overall economic situation in the country.
For example, during the recession, the production of the tax system was generally recognized to reduce tax rates, to reduce the types of taxes, to stimulate the social and economic life of the country.
And vice versa, during the period of rising taxes, as a rule, rise, increase, and thus the income into the budget is regulated.
If we consider the methods of tax control, then the main methods are admitted to us are chamber checks and exit checks.
Chamber checks are carried out when the enterprises or individual entrepreneurs present tax declarations to the tax authorities.
They are carried out when checking the reporting. As a rule, they are associated with arithmetic errors, with some additional requests, and carried out on the territory of the tax authority.
In the case of exit checks, they are called documentary in another way, the tax authority has the right to visit your enterprise on the basis of the Part I of the Tax Code.
Moreover, this meeting will last, as a rule, for two months. Such exit checks are provided no less than once every two years.
Exit checks can be complex, in this case, all types of taxes are checked. Tax on income, GDP, uniform social tax, other taxes can be selective.
That is, on one tax, they can be thematic, that is, on any type of activity, for example, related to the correctness of the calculation of the single tax on the mentioned income.
Tax checks can be counterfeited. In the case of counterfeited checks, the period of periodicity of checks is not limited to legislation, because they are associated with your partners, not with you personally.
Information for tax checks can be obtained from internal or external sources. Internal sources are primarily associated with the rules that are available for service use, developed in the tax structures themselves and are not subject to disclosure.
External sources include the police, the prosecutor's office, and the Internet. The site www.compromat.ru is particularly popular.
Often, when a tax officer visits this site, he finds a lot of information about companies that are engaged in cash, money, places of mass registration and other factors that lead to the optimization of tax coverage.
At present, we have adopted a concept of conducting tax checks. It was adopted not so long ago, in mid-2007, and thus the tax authorities have made significant changes to the plan of tax checks.
Previously, tax checks had to be carried out at each enterprise for two years. With the adoption of this concept, the Tax Office developed several criteria for assessing risks for including a particular enterprise in the plan of tax checks.
Moreover, these criteria were published for open access and this document is intended for both tax authorities and taxpayers themselves.
Let's consider several main criteria for assessing risks that are laid out in this concept.
If your tax burden is significantly lower than the average level for any tax or all taxes, this is recognized as a risk for including you in the tax check.
If the losses that you have reflected in your accounting or tax reports are repeated systematically for two or three years in a row, this also raises certain doubts.
If your explanation of the losses is not convincing, the Tax Office may include you in the plan of tax checks.
If the share of tax deductions in the Tax Office has increased by 89% in the last 12 months, this is also recognized as a risk.
The average monthly salary is lower than the average level in the industry. It may also adversely affect the future of your enterprise.
The average monthly salary can be easily verified on the Internet. As a rule, open and transparent companies publish their average income to attract the best employees and clients to develop the stability of their business.
If an enterprise systematically imposes intermediary agreements without the presence of a business goal, this is also recognized as a risk.
Often, an enterprise, in order to exclude the possibility of meeting with tax officers for a tax check, can perform an operation such as withdrawing from an account in one tax inspection and placing it in another account.
This is not prohibited and not limited by any indicators in accordance with part of the First Tax Code. Some dishonest taxpayers are used, since when transferring to another inspection, the period for a mandatory check by tax authorities, which is, as I said, two years, can start counting again.
The repeated approach to the limit of the indicators on the basis of which the right to apply a special tax regime in the form of a simplified tax system or a single tax on the tax revenue also raises certain questions for tax authorities.
Along with the existence of all listed risks, the concept of planning tax inspections contains the idea that the existence of these risks does not mean that you are dishonest taxpayers.
It does not mean that you will necessarily be included in the tax inspection plan. For this, if there are objective reasons, you can personally meet with representatives of tax authorities and, as they say, put all the points on the table.
The next issue is losses that can be recognized in accordance with tax legislation. Earlier, we considered losses that were reflected in the accounting report of this enterprise for two or three years.
But in accordance with the Tax Code, in accordance with Chapter 25, some types of losses are still taken into account in the tax base and are reflected in the tax declaration. With these losses, the risks of a tax inspection are not applied.
It is impossible to say that there are no losses, but there are losses due to violations, whose perpetrators have not been identified, losses due to fire or natural disasters, losses obtained in previous tax periods and revealed in the current period, losses from the implementation of amortized property, from the implementation of the right to claim on operations with securities.
They can be recognized in the tax base and do not pose any risks. This must be taken into account and not be afraid to show them in the tax report.
When can I refuse this requirement? First, when meeting with the Tax Inspection on the territory of your enterprise, tax experts must present their official certificate. In addition, they must have a written notification of the enterprise about the start and term of the tax inspection.
This document should also include a list of documents necessary for tax inspection on a particular tax or a number of taxes. In particular, your company's institutional documents, testimony on the settlement of tax reports, tax declarations, accounting records, both accounting and tax, all licenses that allow you to conduct this or that action, and the following documents should be listed.
The following documents should be listed.
If you refuse to present documents listed in the notification of tax inspectors on the implementation of your tax inspection, you will be fined for each unrepresented document in accordance with the dimensions established in the first part of the Tax Code.
After studying the methodological materials in more detail and getting acquainted with the tax legislation on the tax system or taxes, you will be able to choose the tax regime that is most effective for you and your business at the moment.
As you have already understood, each tax system has its advantages and disadvantages. But if the company regularly controls this process, then your company may be able to pay as much taxes as it can afford at the moment. Good luck to you and your business. Thank you.